What is Pactus Blockchain?
Pactus is powered by a real Proof of stake consensus mechanism.
Pactus has an unlimited pool of validators that
anyone can become a validator by staking some coins.
On the other hand, there is a committee of validators that generates new blocks.
The size of the committee is fixed to 21 validators.
However the committee members are not fixed and they can change randomly.
But how does this change happen?
Pactus has a cryptographic sortition algorithm that
changes the committee members.
In each block,
each validator generates one and only one random number
between zero and the total stake.
If the generated number is less than the validators' stake,
the validator will be nominated to be inside the committee for the next block
and the last validator in the committee will leave the committee.
For example,
consider the situation that
100 coins have been staked so far,
Alice has staked 30 coins, Bob 20 coins, Carol 25 coins and so on and so on.
Validators start generating random numbers between zero and 100.
Remember that the total stake is 100.
Carol can generate a random number less than her stake which is 15.
Therefore she can enter the committee on the next block.
As you can see the chance of entering the committee depends on the amount of stake.
If you have more stakes, therefore you have more chances to enter the committee.
This sortition algorithm repeats per block.
When a validator joins the committee, it has a chance to propose a block
and if the block is accepted by other committee members,
the proposer will receive one coin as block reward.
Transactions in Pactus Blockchain are stamped.
Stamping transaction simply means putting something from the previous block
(like block ID)
into the header of the transaction.
Stamping the transactions has some benefits, like:
the stamped transactions are loyal to the main chain
and therefore the blockchain becomes immune against attacks
like Long-Range attack which is very deadly for Proof of Stake blockchains.
Also stamped transactions have a lifetime
and they are valid only for one day.
The economic model in Pactus is almost similar to Bitcoin.
The total supply in the Pactus Blockchain is 21 million coins
and therefore Pactus is a deflationary cryptocurrency (like Bitcoin).
So the value of the coins should increase by time,
since the number of coins is limited.
In order to achieve that,
there is a special account in the genesis block which is called “Treasury account”.
The Treasury account has 21 million coins at the genesis time,
and no one has access to the treasury account.
In each block,
one coin from the treasury account will move to the block proposer as block reward.
Unlike bitcoin which has a halving mechanism for block reward,
block reward in Pactus is fixed and it is always one coin per block.
After 21 million blocks or almost 6 and half years the rewards will be finished.
However the validators can be incentivized by the transaction fees at that time.
Since the block reward is fixed,
the token distribution in Pactus is linear compared to Bitcoin.
This is a fair and good mechanism for token distribution
in a Proof of Stake blockchain.
Since the validators are powered by stakes (or coins)
there is a good motivation for validators to join the network earlier.
Transaction fees in Pactus are fixed and
calculated based on the transferred values (not transferred bits).
There is a consensus between validators to
define the percentage and minimum fee amount.
The minimum fee amount secures the network against spam transactions.
Pactus starts with only 4 bootstrap validators.
These bootstrap validators have no stake.
Whenever the 21st validator joins the network,
these bootstrap validators will be retired and
the network will be secured by other validators.
In this time the new validators can join the committee by running the sortition algorithm.
Running a validator in Pactus is easy, see you there.